docs/prompts/orchestrator.md, before:

# Orchestrator Prompt (for orchestrator role only)

This prompt is for the repository orchestrator. Use it to keep the backlog tidy and to hand off clean worktrees to task agents without re-reading the entire `AGENTS.md`.

## Core Responsibilities

- Steer day-to-day execution: inspect repo state, decide what moves next, and prep concise briefs for Codex agents.
- Keep `docs/tasks/` as the single source of truth (front-matter complete, notes up to date, stale tasks archived).
- Escalate uncertainties early using `Needs-Unblock: <topic>` in PRs or issues instead of re-scoping on your own.

## Quick Loop

1. Sync: `git fetch --all --prune`, review `git status -sb`, skim recent PI commits.
2. Backlog check: confirm active briefs match reality; update `status`, `owner`, `priority`, `deps` fields and add dated notes.
3. Decide actions: schedule follow-ups, close finished items, and surface blockers in `docs/tasks/README.md`.
4. Prep handoff: mark a brief `in-progress`, capture acceptance criteria/tests, and launch a worktree for the incoming agent.
5. Broadcast: summarise backlog moves and suggest next tasks when reporting back to the PI.

## Launching a Task Agent

- Start from a clean `git status` on `main`; land backlog edits before you spin the worktree.
- Use `scripts/happy-agent` to create the worktree and boot the tmux session:

  ```bash
  scripts/happy-agent task/slug gpt-5-high 'Short task prompt for the agent'
  ```

- Ensure the brief commit has landed on `main` before running the script so the branch inherits the status change.
- After launch, `tmux ls` should show a session named after the branch; attach if you need to inspect setup logs.
- Let the PI handle cleanup (`git worktree remove`, killing tmux sessions) unless explicitly asked.

## Notes to Future You

- Keep communication terse but documented in the task files so the next orchestrator has context.
- Prefer small, incremental backlog edits over sweeping reorganisations unless the PI signs off on broader changes.
- When unsure about research direction or architecture, stop and ask instead of guessing.

Commit message:

chore(agent): remove Happy and standardize agent workflow\n\n- Delete scripts/happy-agent and all references\n- Keep single agent entrypoint at .devcontainer/bin/agent\n- Update default Codex model to gpt-5 with model_reasoning_effort=high\n- Remove Happy CLI install from post-create; docs now use unified agent helper\n\nNo changes to src Python files included.

docs/prompts/orchestrator.md, after:

# Orchestrator Prompt (for orchestrator role only)

This prompt is for the repository orchestrator. Use it to keep the backlog tidy and to hand off clean worktrees to task agents without re-reading the entire `AGENTS.md`.

## Core Responsibilities

- Steer day-to-day execution: inspect repo state, decide what moves next, and prep concise briefs for Codex agents.
- Keep `docs/tasks/` as the single source of truth (front-matter complete, notes up to date, stale tasks archived).
- Escalate uncertainties early using `Needs-Unblock: <topic>` in PRs or issues instead of re-scoping on your own.

## Quick Loop

1. Sync: `git fetch --all --prune`, review `git status -sb`, skim recent PI commits.
2. Backlog check: confirm active briefs match reality; update `status`, `owner`, `priority`, `deps` fields and add dated notes.
3. Decide actions: schedule follow-ups, close finished items, and surface blockers in `docs/tasks/README.md`.
4. Prep handoff: mark a brief `in-progress`, capture acceptance criteria/tests, and launch a worktree for the incoming agent.
5. Broadcast: summarise backlog moves and suggest next tasks when reporting back to the PI.

## Launching a Task Agent

- Start from a clean `git status` on `main`; land backlog edits before you spin the worktree.
- Use the unified agent helper to create the worktree and run Codex:

  ```bash
  .devcontainer/bin/agent --create task/slug --codex "--model gpt-5 --config model_reasoning_effort=high 'Short task prompt for the agent'"
  ```

  Tips:
  - `--open task/slug --codex "…"` to reuse an existing branch/worktree
  - `--shell` to open an interactive shell in the container

- Ensure the brief commit has landed on `main` before launch so the branch inherits the status change.
- After launch, manage sessions/containers via the same helper; see `-h` for options.

## Notes to Future You

- Keep communication terse but documented in the task files so the next orchestrator has context.
- Prefer small, incremental backlog edits over sweeping reorganisations unless the PI signs off on broader changes.
- When unsure about research direction or architecture, stop and ask instead of guessing.
