skills/testing-and-ci.md, before:

---
name: testing-and-ci
description: Use for detailed testing, static analysis, incremental selection, and CI parity/troubleshooting.
last-updated: 2025-10-17
---

# Testing & CI

## Instructions
- Use these mechanics when you need details beyond the Good Code Loop quickstart.
- Capture exact commands and outputs when failures occur; include them in task notes and PRs.

## Commands & Gates

- `just checks` — format (Ruff), lint (Ruff), type (Pyright), smoke tests (Pytest).
- `just fix` — apply Ruff auto-fixes; rerun `just checks` to confirm.
- `just test` — incremental smoke tests. Inspect selection with `INC_ARGS="--debug" just test`.
- `just ci` — CI parity run before handoff or PR when changes are substantial or cross-cutting.

## Incremental Selector

- Selection is computed by `scripts/inc_select.py` and invoked by `just test`.
- Debug decisions with `INC_ARGS="--debug"` to view impacted graph and chosen tests.
- Do not manually reset `.cache/inc_graph.json` mid-task; regressions are harder to diagnose.

## Static Analysis

- Pyright (basic) surfaces type issues; address quickly or document rationale for suppressions.
- Ruff enforces import ordering and selected lint rules; prefer `just fix` where auto-fixes exist.
- `just lint` runs metadata validation: `scripts/load_skills_metadata.py --quiet`. Fix warnings before handoff.

## Troubleshooting Patterns

- Prefer `uv run` for Python invocations to match the locked environment (e.g., `uv run python -m pytest ...`).
- For intermittent test failures, run a subset: `pytest -k "<pattern>" --maxfail=1 --disable-warnings`.
- If tests touch temp paths, ensure they stay within the workspace.
- Escalate when a regression persists after two targeted attempts or touches shared infrastructure (CI, devcontainer, base deps).

## CI Parity

- `just ci` mirrors the GitHub Actions workflow locally.
- Record runtime and notable failures; attach log excerpts if parity reveals flakiness.

## Related Skills

- `good-code-loop` — quickstart and review checklist.
- `environment-tooling` — environment troubleshooting when commands fail.
- `performance-discipline` — benchmarking after correctness is established.

Commit message:

Simplify Default Dev Loop: Full Smoke by Default; Selector Opt-In (vibe-kanban 667ec958)
Goal
- Make the developer loop predictable for newcomers: `just test` runs full smoke by default; the incremental selector is opt-in.

Context
- The custom incremental selector (`scripts/inc_select.py`) is powerful but conceptually heavy. Defaulting to full smoke reduces surprises. See `docs/reviews/15-project-complexity.md`.

Deliverables
- `Justfile` changes:
  - `just test` → run `pytest -q -m smoke` (full), no selector
  - Add `just test-fast` → current selector-based flow (document `JUST_USE_SELECTOR=1` or similar gate)
  - `just help` output updated to reflect both modes
- Docs updates:
  - `README.md` quickstart updated to note the default and the `test-fast` option
  - `skills/testing-and-ci.md` updated to document the selector as optional and how to enable it

Scope & Non-Goals
- In-scope: adjusting Just recipes and docs to change defaults and document the toggle.
- Out-of-scope: re-implementing the selector or broad CI changes; keep CI parity as-is.

Hints
- Keep the previous selector code intact; add a clear environment variable gate and a help message printed by the recipe when the selector is skipped.
- Ensure `.cache/` semantics remain unchanged for those who opt in.

Acceptance Criteria
- Local run: `just test` executes a full smoke run; `just test-fast` uses the selector
- `just help` lists both with clear descriptions
- `README.md` and `skills/testing-and-ci.md` mention the new defaults
- `just checks` — green

Escalation
- Add `Needs-Unblock: dev-loop` if policy decisions are needed (e.g., whether to keep `INC_ARGS` semantics).

Validation
- Paste a short transcript of `just test` and `just test-fast` runs in the PR, showing the difference.

skills/testing-and-ci.md, after:

---
name: testing-and-ci
description: Use for detailed testing, static analysis, incremental selection, and CI parity/troubleshooting.
last-updated: 2025-10-21
---

# Testing & CI

## Instructions
- Use these mechanics when you need details beyond the Good Code Loop quickstart.
- Capture exact commands and outputs when failures occur; include them in task notes and PRs.

## Commands & Gates

- `just checks` — format (Ruff), lint (Ruff), type (Pyright), smoke tests (Pytest). Runs the full smoke tier unless `JUST_USE_SELECTOR=1`.
- `just fix` — apply Ruff auto-fixes; rerun `just checks` to confirm.
- `just test` — full smoke-tier run. Set `JUST_USE_SELECTOR=1 just test` to reuse the selector.
- `just test-fast` — incremental smoke tests via the selector. Inspect selection with `INC_ARGS="--debug" just test-fast`.
- `just ci` — CI parity run before handoff or PR when changes are substantial or cross-cutting.

## Incremental Selector

- Selection is computed by `scripts/inc_select.py` and runs when you opt in via `JUST_USE_SELECTOR=1 just test` or `just test-fast`.
- Debug decisions with `INC_ARGS="--debug" just test-fast` (or `INC_ARGS="--debug" JUST_USE_SELECTOR=1 just test`) to view impacted graph and chosen tests.
- Export `JUST_USE_SELECTOR=1` in your shell if you prefer the selector by default; otherwise the recipes fall back to the full smoke tier and print a reminder.
- Do not manually reset `.cache/inc_graph.json` mid-task; regressions are harder to diagnose.

## Static Analysis

- Pyright (basic) surfaces type issues; address quickly or document rationale for suppressions.
- Ruff enforces import ordering and selected lint rules; prefer `just fix` where auto-fixes exist.
- `just lint` runs metadata validation: `scripts/load_skills_metadata.py --quiet`. Fix warnings before handoff.

## Troubleshooting Patterns

- Prefer `uv run` for Python invocations to match the locked environment (e.g., `uv run python -m pytest ...`).
- For intermittent test failures, run a subset: `pytest -k "<pattern>" --maxfail=1 --disable-warnings`.
- If tests touch temp paths, ensure they stay within the workspace.
- Escalate when a regression persists after two targeted attempts or touches shared infrastructure (CI, devcontainer, base deps).

## CI Parity

- `just ci` mirrors the GitHub Actions workflow locally.
- Record runtime and notable failures; attach log excerpts if parity reveals flakiness.

## Related Skills

- `good-code-loop` — quickstart and review checklist.
- `environment-tooling` — environment troubleshooting when commands fail.
- `performance-discipline` — benchmarking after correctness is established.
