.devcontainer/README.md, before:

# Devcontainer Environment (Owner Workflow)

This directory contains the environment scaffolding for the “Project Owner” golden path. It is intentionally scoped: environment preparation lives here; project tasks stay in the repo root.

Components
- `devcontainer.json`: base image + post-create/post-start hooks
- `post-create.sh`: install uv, just, VS Code CLI; quick project sync
- `post-start.sh`: idempotent ownership fixups, fast uv sync, diagnostics
- `Justfile`: scoped task runner for environment services (VibeKanban, VS Code Tunnel, Cloudflared)

Daily usage (inside container)
- Start services (one terminal per command):
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-vibe`
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-tunnel`
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-cf`
- Status / stop:
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-status`
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-stop`

Cloudflare Worker (font injection)
- Files under `.devcontainer/cloudflare/` (wrangler-based)
  - `worker-font-injector.js`, `wrangler.toml`
- Deploy in container: `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile cf-worker-deploy`
- Tail logs: `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile cf-worker-tail`

Cloudflare tunnel (one-time prep)
- `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-cloudflare-setup` — write `config-<tunnel>.yml` and ensure the DNS route points at the tunnel (requires Cloudflare login + tunnel auth).

Bind mounts (host recommended)
- Host mirrors container HOME via `/srv/devhome`:
  - `/srv/devhome/.config/gh` → `/home/codespace/.config/gh`
  - `/srv/devhome/.vscode` → `/home/codespace/.vscode`
  - `/srv/devhome/.config/codex` → `/home/codespace/.config/codex`
  - `/srv/devhome/.config/.wrangler` → `/home/codespace/.config/.wrangler` (persists Cloudflare Wrangler OAuth tokens)
  - `/srv/devhome/.cloudflared` → `/home/codespace/.cloudflared` (tunnel certs + config)
  - `/srv/devhome/.cache/uv` → `/home/codespace/.cache/uv`
  - `/srv/devhome/.local/share/ai/bloop/vibe-kanban` → `/home/codespace/.local/share/ai/bloop/vibe-kanban`
- Worktrees:
  - `/srv/devworktrees/vibe-kanban/worktrees` → `/var/tmp/vibe-kanban/worktrees`

Cloudflared installation (deterministic)
---------------------------------------
- `post-create.sh` installs `cloudflared` from Cloudflare’s official APT repo (Ubuntu 20.04 / focal).
- Steps: write the key to `/usr/share/keyrings/cloudflare-main.gpg`, add `https://pkg.cloudflare.com/cloudflared focal main`, run `apt-get update`, then `apt-get install -y cloudflared`.
- Failures are surfaced explicitly so you can fix the image or install manually. Adjust the suite (e.g. jammy) if you change the base image.
- After installing and authenticating, run `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-cloudflare-setup` once to wire the hostname to the tunnel.

Rebuild / test the environment
- Rebuild the devcontainer (Reopen/Rebuild in Container) and review the post-create logs.
- Or run inside the container:
  ```bash
  sudo apt-get update
  bash .devcontainer/post-create.sh
  ```
- Confirm `cloudflared` installs cleanly or follow the printed error.

Start devcontainer on host
`devcontainer up --workspace-folder /srv/workspaces/msc-math-viterbo`

Container environment defaults
- Defined under `containerEnv` in `devcontainer.json`:
  - `FRONTEND_PORT=3000`, `HOST=0.0.0.0` (VibeKanban UI)
  - `TUNNEL_NAME=viterbo-dev` (VS Code Tunnel name)
  - `CF_TUNNEL=vibekanban` (Cloudflared named tunnel)
  - `VSCODE_CLI_DATA_DIR=/home/codespace/.vscode` (aligns with the mount)
  - `XDG_CONFIG_HOME`, `XDG_DATA_HOME`, `XDG_CACHE_HOME` pinned to HOME paths
- Override per session if needed when running commands.

Notes
- Keep `.venv` per worktree for isolation; uv handles cross-filesystem copies once.
- Hooks never auto-start services; the Justfile gives explicit control.
- VibeKanban ships via `npx`; font customization happens via the Cloudflare Worker.

Commit message:

Secure VibeKanban (vibe-kanban 75c94941)
Right now, vibekanban.joernstoehler.com is public, which means anyone can issue tasks without authentication. We would like to secure this angle of attack.
Look up our project owner workflow, and the environment, the Justfile et al describe how I setup the env.

Investigate in detail, then propose, but don't implement, different solutions, and compare them. Ask questions for clarification, and finally give a recommendation for what to do.

.devcontainer/README.md, after:

# Devcontainer Environment (Owner Workflow)

This directory contains the environment scaffolding for the “Project Owner” golden path. It is intentionally scoped: environment preparation lives here; project tasks stay in the repo root.

Components
- `devcontainer.json`: base image + post-create/post-start hooks
- `post-create.sh`: install uv, just, VS Code CLI; quick project sync
- `post-start.sh`: idempotent ownership fixups, fast uv sync, diagnostics
- `Justfile`: scoped task runner for environment services (VibeKanban, VS Code Tunnel, Cloudflared)

Daily usage (inside container)
- Start services (one terminal per command):
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-vibe`
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-tunnel`
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-cf`
- Status / stop:
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-status`
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-stop`

Cloudflare Worker (font injection)
- Files under `.devcontainer/cloudflare/` (wrangler-based)
  - `worker-font-injector.js`, `wrangler.toml`
- Deploy in container: `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile cf-worker-deploy`
- Tail logs: `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile cf-worker-tail`

Cloudflare tunnel (one-time prep)
- `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-cloudflare-setup` — write `config-<tunnel>.yml` and ensure the DNS route points at the tunnel (requires Cloudflare login + tunnel auth).

Bind mounts (host recommended)
- Host mirrors container HOME via `/srv/devhome`:
  - `/srv/devhome/.config/gh` → `/home/codespace/.config/gh`
  - `/srv/devhome/.vscode` → `/home/codespace/.vscode`
  - `/srv/devhome/.config/codex` → `/home/codespace/.config/codex`
  - `/srv/devhome/.config/.wrangler` → `/home/codespace/.config/.wrangler` (persists Cloudflare Wrangler OAuth tokens)
  - `/srv/devhome/.cloudflared` → `/home/codespace/.cloudflared` (tunnel certs + config)
  - `/srv/devhome/.cache/uv` → `/home/codespace/.cache/uv`
  - `/srv/devhome/.local/share/ai/bloop/vibe-kanban` → `/home/codespace/.local/share/ai/bloop/vibe-kanban`
- Worktrees:
  - `/srv/devworktrees/vibe-kanban/worktrees` → `/var/tmp/vibe-kanban/worktrees`

Cloudflared installation (deterministic)
---------------------------------------
- `post-create.sh` installs `cloudflared` from Cloudflare’s official APT repo (Ubuntu 20.04 / focal).
- Steps: write the key to `/usr/share/keyrings/cloudflare-main.gpg`, add `https://pkg.cloudflare.com/cloudflared focal main`, run `apt-get update`, then `apt-get install -y cloudflared`.
- Failures are surfaced explicitly so you can fix the image or install manually. Adjust the suite (e.g. jammy) if you change the base image.
- After installing and authenticating, run `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-cloudflare-setup` once to wire the hostname to the tunnel.

Cloudflare Access (one-time, host-side)
---------------------------------------
Goal: require authentication before anyone reaches `https://vibekanban.joernstoehler.com`. Follow Cloudflare’s official guide (“[Create an Access application](https://developers.cloudflare.com/learning-paths/clientless-access/access-application/create-access-app/)”) with the concrete choices below so naming stays consistent.

### Prerequisites
- Cloudflare Zero Trust account with the `joernstoehler.com` zone already connected.
- Identity provider ready for Access (e.g. “One-time PIN” email IdP or GitHub). Keep it simple to start; you can layer more providers later.

### Step-by-step (Zero Trust dashboard)
1. Sign in at <https://one.dash.cloudflare.com> using the account that owns the zone.
2. Navigate to **Zero Trust** → **Access** → **Applications**.
3. Click **Add an application** → choose **Self-hosted**.
4. Fill out the application card:
   - **Name**: `VibeKanban Owner Board`
   - **Domain**: select `vibekanban.joernstoehler.com`
   - **Session Duration**: `1w` (Cloudflare’s max; adjust downward if you prefer more frequent re-auth).
   - Leave the rest at defaults unless you have a reason to change them (no browser rendering needed for a standard web UI).
5. Select **Next** to configure policies, then add a single **Allow** policy named `Owner-only`:
   - **Action**: *Allow*
   - **Include** rule: pick your primary auth method. For a minimal setup choose **Emails** and list the addresses that should reach the board (e.g. `joern@joernstoehler.com`). Alternatively, select the GitHub IdP and point at your organization if you already use it.
   - You can leave **Exclude** and **Require** empty for now.
6. (Optional) Add a **Service Auth** policy if you ever need automation. Give it a descriptive name (e.g. `ci-service-token`), set **Decision** to *Allow*, and choose **Service Tokens** → **Create new token**. Store the generated client ID/secret somewhere safe.
7. Click **Next**, skip App Launcher/block page customisation, then **Save**.
8. Test in a clean browser (or private window) on each device (Android tablet, university Windows PC). You should hit the Cloudflare Access login first, complete the OTP/IdP flow, then reach VibeKanban.

### Maintenance
- Whenever you on-board someone else, revisit **Zero Trust** → **Access** → **Applications** → `VibeKanban Owner Board` → **Policies** and extend the allowlist instead of cloning the app.
- If you revoke access, remove the email/org or delete the service token so old sessions expire naturally at the next validation.
- Record any additions/removals in `mail/` weekly status notes so the audit trail stays outside the dashboard.

Rebuild / test the environment
- Rebuild the devcontainer (Reopen/Rebuild in Container) and review the post-create logs.
- Or run inside the container:
  ```bash
  sudo apt-get update
  bash .devcontainer/post-create.sh
  ```
- Confirm `cloudflared` installs cleanly or follow the printed error.

Start devcontainer on host
`devcontainer up --workspace-folder /srv/workspaces/msc-math-viterbo`

Container environment defaults
- Defined under `containerEnv` in `devcontainer.json`:
  - `FRONTEND_PORT=3000`, `HOST=0.0.0.0` (VibeKanban UI)
  - `TUNNEL_NAME=viterbo-dev` (VS Code Tunnel name)
  - `CF_TUNNEL=vibekanban` (Cloudflared named tunnel)
  - `VSCODE_CLI_DATA_DIR=/home/codespace/.vscode` (aligns with the mount)
  - `XDG_CONFIG_HOME`, `XDG_DATA_HOME`, `XDG_CACHE_HOME` pinned to HOME paths
- Override per session if needed when running commands.

Notes
- Keep `.venv` per worktree for isolation; uv handles cross-filesystem copies once.
- Hooks never auto-start services; the Justfile gives explicit control.
- VibeKanban ships via `npx`; font customization happens via the Cloudflare Worker.
