docs/environment.md, before:

# Environment (Owner Workflow)

This page documents the “golden path” environment used by the Project Owner. It is stable, explicit, and minimal — agents don’t need to understand every piece to do their day-to-day work; they can refer here for maintenance or when refactoring the environment.

Overview
- Client: Chrome on Android tablet.
- Host workstation: Ubuntu 24.04 desktop with Tailscale.
- Devcontainer: the project’s full dev stack — VibeKanban (via npx), agents, repo, VS Code Tunnel, Cloudflared.
- Persistence: host bind mounts for tokens, caches, VibeKanban data, and worktrees.

Host (one-time)
- Install Tailscale; log in.
- Install devcontainer CLI.
- Create bind-mount roots (example):
  - sudo mkdir -p /srv/devhome/.config/gh /srv/devhome/.vscode /srv/devhome/.config/codex /srv/devhome/.config/.wrangler /srv/devhome/.cloudflared /srv/devhome/.cache/uv /srv/devhome/.local/share/ai/bloop/vibe-kanban
  - sudo mkdir -p /srv/devworktrees/vibe-kanban/worktrees
  - sudo chown -R "$USER:$USER" /srv/devhome /srv/devworktrees
- Clone repo under `/srv/workspaces/msc-math-viterbo` (preferred single path for simplicity).

Devcontainer (start on host)
devcontainer up --workspace-folder /srv/workspaces/msc-math-viterbo

Notes
- Data dir (Linux): ~/.local/share/ai/bloop/vibe-kanban (contains db.sqlite, config.json, profiles.json).
- Worktrees base: /var/tmp/vibe-kanban/worktrees.
- Cloudflare Worker: configured under `.devcontainer/cloudflare/` and deployed with wrangler via:
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile cf-worker-deploy`
  - Requires `wrangler login` (browser flow) in the container once.
- Keep .venv per worktree; keep uv cache central (~/.cache/uv). A small hardlink→copy fallback cost on first sync is expected and acceptable.
- post-create.sh installs uv, just, VS Code CLI and performs a light uv sync.
- post-start.sh fixes permissions idempotently and prints diagnostics; it does not auto-start services.

Daily start (inside the container)
- Start services (each in its own terminal):
  - VibeKanban: just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-vibe
  - VS Code Tunnel: just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-tunnel
  - Cloudflared: just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-cf
- Status/Stop:
  - just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-status
  - just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-stop

Client (Android Chrome)
- Open VS Code Tunnel URL and https://vibekanban.joernstoehler.com
- To open a task worktree: run `code --add /var/tmp/vibe-kanban/worktrees/<id>` in the devcontainer shell.

Font customization (optional)
- Keep upstream VibeKanban pristine and inject “Inter” at the edge with a simple Cloudflare Worker on vibekanban.joernstoehler.com/* using HTMLRewriter to append the <link> and <style> tags into <head>. This isolates UI tweaks from upstream releases.

Auth hints (first time after switching to bind mounts)
- gh: gh auth login
- VS Code tunnel: code tunnel (will guide through auth)
- cloudflared: cloudflared tunnel login
- codex CLI (if used): re-auth if necessary

Golden-path stance
- No Codespaces; no Codex Cloud. We run locally on the workstation via devcontainer.
- Services are independent; start/stop individually for resilience.
- VibeKanban via npx (no fork). Persist its data and worktrees on host bind mounts.

Commit message:

Secure VibeKanban (vibe-kanban 75c94941)
Right now, vibekanban.joernstoehler.com is public, which means anyone can issue tasks without authentication. We would like to secure this angle of attack.
Look up our project owner workflow, and the environment, the Justfile et al describe how I setup the env.

Investigate in detail, then propose, but don't implement, different solutions, and compare them. Ask questions for clarification, and finally give a recommendation for what to do.

docs/environment.md, after:

# Environment (Owner Workflow)

This page documents the “golden path” environment used by the Project Owner. It is stable, explicit, and minimal — agents don’t need to understand every piece to do their day-to-day work; they can refer here for maintenance or when refactoring the environment.

Overview
- Client: Chrome on Android tablet.
- Host workstation: Ubuntu 24.04 desktop with Tailscale.
- Devcontainer: the project’s full dev stack — VibeKanban (via npx), agents, repo, VS Code Tunnel, Cloudflared.
- Persistence: host bind mounts for tokens, caches, VibeKanban data, and worktrees.

Host (one-time)
- Install Tailscale; log in.
- Install devcontainer CLI.
- Create bind-mount roots (example):
  - sudo mkdir -p /srv/devhome/.config/gh /srv/devhome/.vscode /srv/devhome/.config/codex /srv/devhome/.config/.wrangler /srv/devhome/.cloudflared /srv/devhome/.cache/uv /srv/devhome/.local/share/ai/bloop/vibe-kanban
  - sudo mkdir -p /srv/devworktrees/vibe-kanban/worktrees
  - sudo chown -R "$USER:$USER" /srv/devhome /srv/devworktrees
- Clone repo under `/srv/workspaces/msc-math-viterbo` (preferred single path for simplicity).
- In Cloudflare Zero Trust, create the `VibeKanban Owner Board` Access application that protects `https://vibekanban.joernstoehler.com` (see `.devcontainer/README.md` for the exact choices).

Devcontainer (start on host)
devcontainer up --workspace-folder /srv/workspaces/msc-math-viterbo

Notes
- Data dir (Linux): ~/.local/share/ai/bloop/vibe-kanban (contains db.sqlite, config.json, profiles.json).
- Worktrees base: /var/tmp/vibe-kanban/worktrees.
- Cloudflare Worker: configured under `.devcontainer/cloudflare/` and deployed with wrangler via:
  - `just -f .devcontainer/Justfile cf-worker-deploy`
  - Requires `wrangler login` (browser flow) in the container once.
- Keep .venv per worktree; keep uv cache central (~/.cache/uv). A small hardlink→copy fallback cost on first sync is expected and acceptable.
- post-create.sh installs uv, just, VS Code CLI and performs a light uv sync.
- post-start.sh fixes permissions idempotently and prints diagnostics; it does not auto-start services.

Daily start (inside the container)
- Start services (each in its own terminal):
  - VibeKanban: just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-vibe
  - VS Code Tunnel: just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-tunnel
  - Cloudflared: just -f .devcontainer/Justfile start-cf
- Cloudflare Access: the public URL (`https://vibekanban.joernstoehler.com`) is gated by a Zero Trust Access application. Maintain the allowlist under Zero Trust → Access → Applications, and sign in with the configured IdP/OTP before using the board. Issue a service token only if non-browser automation needs to reach the board.
- Status/Stop:
  - just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-status
  - just -f .devcontainer/Justfile owner-stop

Client (Android Chrome)
- Open VS Code Tunnel URL and https://vibekanban.joernstoehler.com
- To open a task worktree: run `code --add /var/tmp/vibe-kanban/worktrees/<id>` in the devcontainer shell.

Font customization (optional)
- Keep upstream VibeKanban pristine and inject “Inter” at the edge with a simple Cloudflare Worker on vibekanban.joernstoehler.com/* using HTMLRewriter to append the <link> and <style> tags into <head>. This isolates UI tweaks from upstream releases.

Auth hints (first time after switching to bind mounts)
- gh: gh auth login
- VS Code tunnel: code tunnel (will guide through auth)
- cloudflared: cloudflared tunnel login
- codex CLI (if used): re-auth if necessary

Golden-path stance
- No Codespaces; no Codex Cloud. We run locally on the workstation via devcontainer.
- Services are independent; start/stop individually for resilience.
- VibeKanban via npx (no fork). Persist its data and worktrees on host bind mounts.
