docs/briefs/subtasks/2025-10-12-subtask-remove-polars-migrate-hf-datasets.md, before:

---
status: proposed
created: 2025-10-12
workflow: task
summary: Remove Polars adapters and migrate atlas to Hugging Face Datasets.
---

# Subtask: Remove Polars, migrate atlas to HF Datasets

## Context

- We decided to standardize the atlas on HF Datasets (row-first, Parquet-backed, cloud-ready).
- Polars-specific helpers live under `viterbo/_wrapped/polars_io.py` and `viterbo.atlas` consumes Polars types.

## Objectives

- Remove Polars-only adapters from the public path.
- Introduce HF Datasets adapters in `viterbo.atlas` for build/load/save/map.
- Keep local Parquet storage under `artefacts/datasets/` (single file or sharded directory).

## Plan

1. Add HF adapters in `viterbo.atlas`:
   - `build_dataset(rows_iterable) -> Dataset`
   - `append_rows(dataset, rows_iterable) -> Dataset`
   - `save_dataset(dataset, path) -> None`
   - `load_dataset(path) -> Dataset`
   - `map_quantities(dataset, fn) -> Dataset`
2. Update placeholder notebooks to exercise HF-backed atlas.
3. Deprecate and then remove Polars wrappers (`viterbo/_wrapped/polars_io.py`).
4. Purge Polars imports from `viterbo.atlas` and tests; adjust tests to HF Datasets.

## Acceptance

- CI green; tests use HF Datasets only.
- No imports from Polars remain under `src/viterbo/`.
- Example notebooks run end-to-end with HF-backed atlas.

Commit message:

fix: align atlas tiny quantities with math algorithms

docs/briefs/subtasks/2025-10-12-subtask-remove-polars-migrate-hf-datasets.md, after:

---
status: backlog
created: 2025-10-12
workflow: task
summary: Wire HF Datasets builders directly now that Polars wrappers are gone.
---

# Subtask: Remove Polars, migrate atlas to HF Datasets

## Context

- The atlas is standardised on HF Datasets (row-first, Parquet-backed, cloud-ready).
- Legacy Polars wrappers (`viterbo/_wrapped/polars_io.py`) and the `viterbo.atlas` module referenced in older docs have already
  been deleted during the namespace cleanup.
- Builders currently live under `src/viterbo/datasets2/` with an `atlas_tiny` preset that only materialises geometry and volume
  columns.

## Objectives

- Ensure builders return the documented quantities (capacity, spectrum, tags, provenance) per sample.
- Keep local Parquet storage under `artefacts/datasets/` (single file or sharded directory) with clear versioning guidance.
- Update CLI scripts and notebooks to import the existing builders from `viterbo.datasets2` and rely on HF Datasets’ save/load helpers.

## Plan

1. Confirm `_row_from_sample` (or equivalent helper) populates the full schema using `viterbo.math` (implemented for `atlas_tiny`).
2. Update placeholder notebooks and `scripts/build_atlas_small.py` to use the builders and HF Datasets save/load helpers directly.
3. Document dataset presets (`atlas_tiny`, future `atlas_small`) and retention policy in the project guide.

## Acceptance

- CI green; tests cover building and reloading datasets with HF Datasets only.
- Example notebooks run end-to-end with HF-backed atlas builders from `viterbo.datasets2`.
- CLI scripts and docs reference the correct import paths; dataset presets are documented with storage locations.
