docs/briefs/2025-10-12-workflow-capacity-algorithms.md, before:

---
status: adopted
created: 2025-10-12
workflow: workflow
summary: Catalogue algorithms and references for computing the EHZ capacity of convex polytopes.
---

# Workflow: Algorithms for $c_{\mathrm{EHZ}}$ of Convex Polytopes

## Context

- Covers high-level procedures for evaluating the Ekeland–Hofer–Zehnder (EHZ) capacity $c_{\mathrm{EHZ}}$ on convex polytopes in $\mathbb{R}^{2n}$.
- Implementations are planned under `src/viterbo/math/symplectic.py`, with supporting helpers (e.g., hull conversions) in `src/viterbo/math/geometry.py` and `src/viterbo/math/halfspaces.py`.
- Tolerance constants currently live alongside the routines; promote them into a shared numerics helper once multiple solvers rely on the same policy.
- The legacy `viterbo.symplectic` namespace has been retired; use the modern `viterbo.math.symplectic` module directly.

## Algorithms

### 1. Facet-normal optimisation (general dimension)

- **Reference.** Leipold & Vallentin (2024), *Computing the EHZ capacity is NP-hard*, Theorem 1.1.
- **Idea.** Optimise over non-negative coefficients $\beta_i$ on facet normals with $\sum \beta_i n_i = 0$ and minimise a quadratic form derived from support numbers.
- **Usage.** Exact for small instances; anchors relaxations for larger polytopes.
- **Pseudocode.**
  ```text
  Input: P = {x | A x ≤ 1}
  Collect normals {n_i}
  Solve: minimize ½ Σ_{i<j} β_i β_j ω(n_i, n_j)
          subject to β ≥ 0, Σ β_i n_i = 0
  Return optimal value
  ```

### 2. Mixed-integer linear relaxation (general dimension)

- **Reference.** Krupp (2020), PhD thesis *Calculating the EHZ Capacity of Polytopes*, Chapter 4.
- **Idea.** Linearise the facet-normal programme by activating candidate facet sets with binary variables; yields bounds and sometimes exact values.
- **Pseudocode.**
  ```text
  Enumerate facet sets F up to size 2n
  Introduce β_i ≥ 0 and binaries y_i for i ∈ F
  Constraints: Σ β_i n_i = 0, β_i ≤ M y_i, Σ y_i = 2n
  Minimise ½ Σ_{i<j} β_i β_j ω(n_i, n_j)
  ```

### 3. Combinatorial Reeb orbit enumeration (4D)

- **Reference.** Chaidez & Hutchings (2022), *Computing Reeb dynamics on four-dimensional convex polytopes*, Theorem 1.2.
- **Idea.** Build the oriented-edge graph of $P$, enumerate admissible cycles representing Reeb orbits, and take the minimal combinatorial action.
- **Notes.** Specific to $n=2$; integrates with the oriented-edge graph builder scheduled for `src/viterbo/math/symplectic.py` once the solver lands.

### 4. Minkowski billiard search (Lagrangian products)

- **Reference.** Rudolf (2022), *The Minkowski billiard characterization of the EHZ-capacity of convex Lagrangian products*, Theorem 1.1.
- **Idea.** For $P = K \times T$, $c_{\mathrm{EHZ}}(P)$ equals the length of the shortest closed $(K,T)$-Minkowski billiard trajectory.
- **Calibration.** Square–diamond Hanner pair gives a canonical baseline with length $8$; enforced in tests to avoid degenerate two-bounce paths.

### 5. Support-function smoothing and convex relaxations (general dimension)

- **Reference.** Haim-Kislev (2023), *Symplectic capacities of convex polytopes via support functions*, Proposition 3.4.
- **Idea.** Smooth the support function, solve for closed characteristics on the smoothed boundary, and decrease the smoothing parameter to converge from above.

### 6. Symmetry-reduced search (centrally symmetric polytopes)

- **Reference.** Artstein-Avidan & Ostrover (2007), *Symplectic billiards and symplectic capacities*, §4.
- **Idea.** Pair opposite facets to halve the variable count and restrict to symmetric billiard trajectories, reducing the search space without changing the optimum.

## Acceptance

- Brief remains synchronised with implemented solvers and corresponding tests (e.g., `tests/viterbo/test_capacity.py`, `tests/viterbo/test_capacity_area_property.py`).
- Each algorithm lists a reproducible reference and highlights constraints or dimensional specialisations.

## Status Log

- 2025-02-14 — Migrated `docs/convex-polytope-cehz-capacities.md` into the briefs tree; emphasised calibration tests and namespace updates.

Commit message:

Implement oriented-edge 4D EHZ solver (vibe-kanban 5c3091e2)
Goal: add the Chaidez–Hutchings oriented-edge Reeb spectrum solver so the library can evaluate EHZ capacities for arbitrary 4D convex polytopes.

Scope:
- Implement `oriented_edge_spectrum_4d` in `src/viterbo/math/capacity_ehz/stubs.py` (or move into a dedicated module) to enumerate admissible oriented edges, compute combinatorial actions, and return the minimal one. Lean on `vertices`, `normals`, and `offsets` generated by existing polytope helpers.
- Expose an entry point that integrates with `capacity_ehz_algorithm2/3` (or a new helper) so generic 4D inputs flow through the solver. Retain the existing Lagrangian-product fast path.
- Add property/fixture-based tests under `tests/math/` that cover known examples (e.g. the pentagon×rotated pentagon counterexample, cubes, centrally symmetric polytopes). Include invariance checks (symplectic, translation, scaling) to match the 2D coverage.
- Update docs (`docs/briefs/2025-10-12-workflow-capacity-algorithms.md` or a new math note) with solver outline and references.

Acceptance:
- CI green with new tests.
- Solver returns expected capacities for the canonical counterexample and equality cases within numerical tolerances (≈1e-6 absolute drift).
- Existing Lagrangian-product path remains intact (no regressions in current tests).

docs/briefs/2025-10-12-workflow-capacity-algorithms.md, after:

---
status: adopted
created: 2025-10-12
workflow: workflow
summary: Catalogue algorithms and references for computing the EHZ capacity of convex polytopes.
---

# Workflow: Algorithms for $c_{\mathrm{EHZ}}$ of Convex Polytopes

## Context

- Covers high-level procedures for evaluating the Ekeland–Hofer–Zehnder (EHZ) capacity $c_{\mathrm{EHZ}}$ on convex polytopes in $\mathbb{R}^{2n}$.
- Implementations are planned under `src/viterbo/math/symplectic.py`, with supporting helpers (e.g., hull conversions) in `src/viterbo/math/geometry.py` and `src/viterbo/math/halfspaces.py`.
- Tolerance constants currently live alongside the routines; promote them into a shared numerics helper once multiple solvers rely on the same policy.
- The legacy `viterbo.symplectic` namespace has been retired; use the modern `viterbo.math.symplectic` module directly.

## Algorithms

### 1. Facet-normal optimisation (general dimension)

- **Reference.** Leipold & Vallentin (2024), *Computing the EHZ capacity is NP-hard*, Theorem 1.1.
- **Idea.** Optimise over non-negative coefficients $\beta_i$ on facet normals with $\sum \beta_i n_i = 0$ and minimise a quadratic form derived from support numbers.
- **Usage.** Exact for small instances; anchors relaxations for larger polytopes.
- **Pseudocode.**
  ```text
  Input: P = {x | A x ≤ 1}
  Collect normals {n_i}
  Solve: minimize ½ Σ_{i<j} β_i β_j ω(n_i, n_j)
          subject to β ≥ 0, Σ β_i n_i = 0
  Return optimal value
  ```

### 2. Mixed-integer linear relaxation (general dimension)

- **Reference.** Krupp (2020), PhD thesis *Calculating the EHZ Capacity of Polytopes*, Chapter 4.
- **Idea.** Linearise the facet-normal programme by activating candidate facet sets with binary variables; yields bounds and sometimes exact values.
- **Pseudocode.**
  ```text
  Enumerate facet sets F up to size 2n
  Introduce β_i ≥ 0 and binaries y_i for i ∈ F
  Constraints: Σ β_i n_i = 0, β_i ≤ M y_i, Σ y_i = 2n
  Minimise ½ Σ_{i<j} β_i β_j ω(n_i, n_j)
  ```

### 3. Combinatorial Reeb orbit enumeration (4D)

- **Reference.** Chaidez & Hutchings (2022), *Computing Reeb dynamics on four-dimensional convex polytopes*, Theorem 1.2.
- **Idea.** Build the oriented-edge graph of $P$, enumerate admissible cycles representing Reeb orbits, and take the minimal combinatorial action.
- **Implementation.** `viterbo.math.capacity_ehz.stubs.oriented_edge_spectrum_4d` assembles the Chaidez–Hutchings oriented-edge graph directly from `vertices`, `normals`, `offsets`, enumerates cycles up to 12 oriented edges, and minimises the combinatorial action subject to the first-hit constraint on each facet.
- **Integration.** `capacity_ehz_algorithm2` keeps the Lagrangian-product fast path, falling back to `oriented_edge_spectrum_4d` for generic 4D inputs; smoke tests cover pentagon×rotated-pentagon, cubes, translation/scaling invariance, and random polytopes.

### 4. Minkowski billiard search (Lagrangian products)

- **Reference.** Rudolf (2022), *The Minkowski billiard characterization of the EHZ-capacity of convex Lagrangian products*, Theorem 1.1.
- **Idea.** For $P = K \times T$, $c_{\mathrm{EHZ}}(P)$ equals the length of the shortest closed $(K,T)$-Minkowski billiard trajectory.
- **Calibration.** Square–diamond Hanner pair gives a canonical baseline with length $8$; enforced in tests to avoid degenerate two-bounce paths.

### 5. Support-function smoothing and convex relaxations (general dimension)

- **Reference.** Haim-Kislev (2023), *Symplectic capacities of convex polytopes via support functions*, Proposition 3.4.
- **Idea.** Smooth the support function, solve for closed characteristics on the smoothed boundary, and decrease the smoothing parameter to converge from above.

### 6. Symmetry-reduced search (centrally symmetric polytopes)

- **Reference.** Artstein-Avidan & Ostrover (2007), *Symplectic billiards and symplectic capacities*, §4.
- **Idea.** Pair opposite facets to halve the variable count and restrict to symmetric billiard trajectories, reducing the search space without changing the optimum.

## Acceptance

- Brief remains synchronised with implemented solvers and corresponding tests (e.g., `tests/viterbo/test_capacity.py`, `tests/viterbo/test_capacity_area_property.py`).
- Each algorithm lists a reproducible reference and highlights constraints or dimensional specialisations.

## Status Log

- 2025-02-14 — Migrated `docs/convex-polytope-cehz-capacities.md` into the briefs tree; emphasised calibration tests and namespace updates.
